[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
louise minchin and dan walker our
headlines for you
today the eu's biggest nations join the
list of countries suspending
use of the oxford astrazeneca vaccine
but the jab
is safe according to the world health
organization and british experts
the message for now is vaccine is safe
effective
it saved thousands and thousands of
elderly and vulnerable people's lives
hundreds more gather to remember sarah
everard as the government unveils new
measures to protect women
exactly a year ago today the curtain
came down on theaters like this one and
others
up and down the uk leaving empty chairs
and empty stages we'll find out how it's
affected those who work on stage and
backstage
and how they're preparing to reopen
another name in retail takes a hit good
morning
thornton's announces store closures and
greg's are expected to show a
significant slump
who will survive the changes to how we
eat and drink
it was the last major sporting event in
the uk to be filled with fans
and now a year on the cheltenham
festival will feel very different
starting today with no crowd
and no famous cheltenham raw
and it may be a little bit gloomy and
damp as you cast open the curtains this
morning but bear with it we're going to
swap the gray skies
for blue ones as we go through the day
i'll have your full forecast here on
breakfast
[Music]
morning it's a tuesday the 16th of march
our main story for you the world health
organization has urged countries
not to pause covered vaccinations after
several major
eu member states suspended their
rollouts of the
oxford astrazeneca jab the who
says the vaccine is safe and there's no
evidence that it causes blood clots
that's the world health organization of
course it's vaccine safety experts will
meet
later to discuss the issue as jim reed
can explain
11 million people in the uk have already
been given their first dose of the
astrazeneca vaccine
without any serious side effects
emerging
but a growing number of other countries
have now suspended its use
after a small number of cases of blood
clotting were recorded
france germany italy and spain have
temporarily stopped using the vaccine
as a precautionary measure days after
norway
said three healthcare workers had needed
hospital treatment
several other european countries
including austria have stopped using
certain batches of the drug
medical regulators in both the uk and
the eu
have said there is no evidence the clots
were the results have been given the
vaccine
itself manufacturer astrazeneca said the
number of cases of blood clotting so far
is no higher than doctors would expect
to see in the general population
in normal times and the government's
scientific advisors
say there is no reason to pause the
rollout in this country
the message for now is vaccine is safe
effective
it saved thousands and thousands of
elderly and vulnerable people's lives
and
we're determined to press on with it
unless we see a major safety signal
to suggest otherwise in which case we
would be open and transparent with the
public
later today the safety committee of the
eu drugs agency
will meet to review all the cases that
have come to light so far
if it gives the green light then other
countries are likely to resume their
vaccination programs quickly
in the uk the message from scientists is
to take
any coronavirus jab if offered as all
the data so far
show the risks of catching covid far
outweigh the risks of a side effect from
any vaccine
jim reed bbc news
downing street has announced a series of
measures aimed at improving safety in
england for women and girls in the wake
of the death of sarah everard
it's after hundreds of people took part
in another vigil for the 33 year old in
london
last night dan johnson reports
this reaction the strength of feeling
isn't just about sarah everard's death
but the wider questions that have been
raised about women's safety
and the response of the police
yesterday officers kept a low profile
mostly hands-off approach
the start of this gathering in
parliament square
it went ahead despite the home secretary
urging people to stick to covid
regulations
and in defiance of the government's new
policing bill
part of which could limit future
protests
last night the home office said it was
already increasing the amount spent
making our streets safer
from 20 to 45 million pounds
this investment will go on very
practical measures like increasing
better lighting more cctv to try to give
people that confidence
that we really really want to instill
after last week's terribly
terribly sad events last night's vigil
moved
to westminster bridge downing street
and the headquarters of london's
metropolitan police
the organisation reclaimed these streets
says
it has lost faith in the leadership of
the force
[Music]
officers did step in telling people to
keep moving head home
or face fines for breaching lockdown
rules
at the center of all this we cannot
forget an
innocent young woman who was just
walking home
sarah everard's death has already shaken
this country
making us question how society works
and whether it fairly protects everyone
dan johnson bbc news in central london
well it's going to speak to dan who is
outside new scotland yard for us this
morning dan good morning to you a little
quieter there this morning but the
debate
continues today doesn't it
absolutely yes the metropolitan police
has been the focus of those further
protests
last night the force is under pressure
the government has announced
extra money to try to make the streets
safer that
safer streets fund is for councils to
bid for it could be used to provide
extra patrols late at night there's a
suggestion that some pilot projects
could be extended which would see
plainclothes officers policing in bars
and nightclubs when they're able to
reopen
labor has said that that investment
doesn't go
anywhere near far enough not even
replacing the cuts that have been made
to local services over the last
few years and the organization reclaimed
these streets has welcomed the funding
but said that there are deeper
cultural issues that need to be
addressed here that misogyny is in
its view baked into the police the
courts the criminal justice system well
the government says its
policing and security bill will extend
sentences we'll give the police more
powers we'll bring more justice for
victims but there are concerns about the
impact
that that could have on the right to
protest in future
and this case has raised some serious
questions
some big issues that will take time to
be understood
and addressed but at the heart of this
of course there is a family
loved ones that are still grieving and
sara everard's murder investigation
is still going on as well dan johnson
thank you very much for we'll speak to
you a little bit later on this morning
preschool meals should be extended in
england over the summer holiday
this year that's according to the new
children's commissioner dame rachel de
souza
speaking to the bbc she said children
have paid a high price during the
pandemic and now
is the time to rethink the support that
they need our education editor branwyn
jeffries has this report
playing with friends at school children
have missed
so much this year so a huge survey of
children is planned in england
to understand their experiences
the children's commissioner argues for
children in government
the new woman in the job says families
still need support
she told me free school meals should
stay through the summer
i absolutely want to see preschool meals
extended and i'm very concerned about
that
about suggestions of dropping universal
credit if the universal credit
was dropped down again i'd like to see
services provided
in that place but i'd rather it wasn't
dropped do you think they were too slow
to listen to marcus rashford
yes these six formers said the pandemic
had affected all their lives seeing
people
as a kind of recreational activity kind
of
went down to nothing and i think the
impacts that has
on someone's mind especially in this
period of your life when you're a
teenager these are the
these this is the time when most of your
memories are made there needs to be
change to to helping people
who have been affected not just by the
pandemic but by
years-long inequalities
the last year has made visible pressures
on children's lives
that were already there the children
who've got a quiet place to study and
those that don't
families under pressure struggling to
put food on the table
and the pressures on young people's
mental health
the government said there is more
support in schools
for mental health and catching up as
well as
220 million pounds going to local
councils
cash for holiday activities and food for
families who need help
this year brownwood jeffries bbc news
the sister of the north korean leader
kim jong-un has warned the u.s
not to cause a stink those are the words
as joe biden's administration prepares
to set out its korean policy
kim yeo jung criticized the us and south
korea for conducting joint military
exercises
her comments come a day before the u.s
secretary's estate and defense are due
to arrive in south korea
nicholas sturgeon is to reveal her
latest plan to ease lockdown
restrictions in scotland later
it's thought the first minister will
give more detail on when shops and
hospitality will be able to open
she's previously said her government
will be led by data
not dates in northern ireland ministers
will also meet to review lockdown
restrictions
they are expected to provide further
clarity on when all school children will
return
to classes i got some remarkable footage
of a pod of orcas to show you
swimming off the coast of shetland these
were filmed by the photographer
gary bucken who was able to follow them
for 45 minutes
as they played with each other we'd like
some whale facts louise go on
well male orcas can grow a draw
jaw-dropping eight meters in length
and can weigh up to six tons despite
that weight they can travel at speeds of
up to 30 miles an hour
what lovely pictures aren't they
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with
dot bbc.co.uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news